Welcome back everybody in this lecture.
We are going to explore giving our surfaces of our objects different materials as you can see here.
Each one of these faces is colored in differently.
And we've done that by assigning different materials to each face.
Let's go hop on over into blender and find out some more.
Okay everybody Welcome back first of all.
Let's go ahead and go to our cube.
Make sure it's selected and go to the properties panel got to make this area wider because we're going
to actually need to see what's going on in here.
Now if we go down on our materials as you've experienced before when we've colored in the whole object,
we can go down to the material properties and then we can name this material.
Now I'm going to name this material straightaway red and change the color of it to red.
Why can't we see anything here.
Well we need change our rendered mode it's currently set to solid.
I'm going to switch across to lookdev and you can also do that we experience the pie menu in the last
lecture you can presss the Z key and you can see there two four six and eight will turn on our various shading
options in this case and in the press 2 and there we go we've changed it to lookdev we can see what's
going on now depending on what this original material was we'll be the one that's assigned to the entire
object by default.
Now if we go ahead and create a new cube object and let's move this over here select that cube object
it doesn't have any default materials assigned to it we can use the dropdown and select red from it
or we can create a new material slots however unless we remove the red from it and then add a new material
in, if we go ahead now and add another material noticed this object now has two material slots if I
change this bottom one if I go Oh no I wanted it red notice that because this one was on top and it
was assigned to the object first It is therefore the default color for all of the faces on our model.
Now if we go ahead to the red we can actually lift it up in this material slot list and that's the up
and down arrow just here.
But notice lifting it up doesn't color in the entire model red we'd have to remove the other material
in order to do that.
Now I'm going to leave this other one on the side as a demonstration in a moment but let's go back to
our main one in the center of the scene and I'm going to press the tab key and go into edit mode and
you'll notice that when we do that in the materials we have assign, select and deselect.
That's pretty awesome.
That means we can assign the material to our object specifically to the face of our objects as well.
So I'm gonna make the material slots a little larger and I'm going to add in another three materials
I've hit the plus key three times I want to go ahead to this top one here creating new material to go
in that material slot and call that material yellow I'm gonna go to the next one click the plus to create
new material and I'm going to call this one blue and then finally for this last one what I'm going
to do is I'm going to start with the red so let's say there's some properties of the red material that
I want to keep and I don't want to have to tweak anything but maybe the color or assign a different
texture to it later on in the course.
So what I can do here is I can click the dropdown select an already existing material in this case red
and we can see straight away that we've got Red assigned now if we go ahead and change this red here
what I want you to be aware of is not only does it change the default color but anything else that also
has that color assigned so do be careful.
Not only does this object have four material slots two of them are actually just the same material in
general you probably wouldn't want that.
Now if you notice next to Red let's inherit the properties of red and then change it.
Now there is a warning just here.
We can see next to the word red to the right of this.
We have the number three that means there are three users of this material it just happens to be that
two of them of the same cube.
And then this other cube is also using it but it's grayed out at the moment.
And the reason why it's grayed out is because you cannot make this change whilst we're in edit mode.
If I was to come out of edit mode back into object mode you'll need your cursor over in the 3D window
to do that.
If you're pressing tab whilst your cursor is anywhere else it won't work.
So make sure you're over the 3D window when you hit that key and then click on that number three.
We see that it's changed the name of that material to red 0 0 1.
Now if we go ahead and tweak the color it's his own individual color pretty awesome and we can call
that green.
Now the reason why you might want to do that is if you set something up perhaps you'd tweak some of
these settings down here and you'd light those settings but you wanted to try it with a different color
than you would want to copy that material's properties and then just change it.
So it's unique and that's what I'd recommend if you are creating a new object.
So if you need to tweak the materials on another object it doesn't necessarily alter.
Now of course if you planned out your scene perfectly you might not need to do that you know that certain
materials are shared everywhere but we're only dealing with basic shades and colors at the moment so
it shouldn't be too much.
OK.
So let's go back into edit mode of this cube and with one of the faces selected we're going to first
of all select the face.
Notice that it is highlighted red at the top if I go ahead and click yellow and then click assign we
see that that face has has changed which is pretty awesome.
Very useful.
I'm going to also change it to yellow so we can really see what's going on there and what we can also
do here's click another face.
Scroll back up.
Let's select the blue assign that and I'm also going to change the color.
And it's as simple as that to start assigning different materials we see here if I click on green and
assign it switches but do bear in mind if you click on another one it will switch back to whatever that
material is because it's ready to edit that material.
Now what you can do here is we can select all of the faces that are currently using the red material
so I'll go ahead and click on select.
You'll see that they're all highlighted and then I can change them all to a different material that
is incredibly useful if we go over to this particular object and go into edit mode.
Notice that it doesn't have any of those additional material slots but we can switch this out for one
of the other ones pretty useful hey let's say that none of our objects now use blue.
So let's switch blue out for red on this object and have we got blue in this one.
Yes.
So let's go over to this object.
Select blue and change it to green, so now blue doesn't have any users in our entire scene but it's still
assigned to this object.
If I were to go ahead and remove it from this object it seems to have disappeared completely.
But don't worry it's still there.
You haven't lost that but this is very important notice.
It's got a zero next to it.
That means that no users in Blender use this material and you will see this zero crop up in all other
places within blender as well.
What this means is if I go ahead and save my work so let's do this now as a real example and I'll call
this 8 material lost and you can probably guess by the name what's going to happen now.
At the moment it is still there blue material.
If I go file and revert we shall revert to the save state.
What we will find is that the blue is no longer there.
In fact it is gone completely.
Now that happened to be not just a color adjustment but something we'd spent tens of minutes maybe even
an hour or two crafting a very complex material but you'd never assigned it to anything or you deleted
the objects it was assigned to save your file and your computer crashed and you reloaded it back up
you would have likely lost the material at that point.
So do bear in mind anything with a zero next to it.
It may be problematic.
So I'm going to go ahead here and these greens are going to swap them out for the yellow material which
should mean that there's zero next to the green.
Perfect.
Okay.
If I go into edit mode and then add new material slots green before I go and get rid of it.
Notice this little paper object like a corner of a piece of paper.
If we click on that it says save this data block even if it has no users now it means if I remove this
material which we can't do in edit mode if I remove that material from the material slot if we now have
a look at that material it's got an F next to it which means it has a fake user.
But most importantly it's not going to disappear at any point.
So if you are playing with multiple materials within blender but they're not necessarily all assigned
to any objects.
That's how you make sure they stay in your save file when you go ahead and save and come back to that
project later.
Wow okay.
So we've taken in lots to do with materials they're mainly just adding different materials into different
materials slots assigning different faces.
And now it's time for a quick challenge. Okay so it's challenge time I'd like it to go ahead and create
multiple materials assigning them to a single mesh object.
Now I'm going to assign them to the model that I made in the extruded exercise earlier.
So I will end up with a model that looks like this is just two main materials there a roof and a wall
material.
But as you can see it really does make the model come alive pause a video now and give it a go. Okay
everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead now and assign multiple materials.
Okay everybody Welcome back.
I am going to go ahead and find one of my previous files rather than creating something new.
I'm going to go over into open recent.
I'm going to go into my church that I built earlier and when i am in
edit mode on this.
So I am already in edit mode.
I'm going to go to my materials that have to do in that order and we've got a couple of options here.
So I'm gonna bring this open we've got our first material.
Call that wll since the majority of the surfaces of this church are going to be a wall.
And then I need another material I'm going to call this one roof.
I'm gonna make it slightly darker in its color so let's go for a gray, a dark gray.
I'm gonna go ahead and select the roof tiles.
I want to be this color shouldn't take too long to do as we whizz round.
Perfect.
And I'm going to assign those colors.
I'm gonna make sure I mean lookdev mode I'm gonna use the radio dial that we saw earlier and with the
Z key I'm gonna change it to lookdev so I can just see the color differences and I'm looking at it
going OK.
I didn't have the roof selected when I was doing those assigns.
Now I have I can see the difference.
Excellent.
Now I don't quite like the wall color here.
I'm going to make it more of a yellowy brick and I'll make that a little lighter as well.
Just need to fiddle around here until I get roughly the right color that looks much better.
And as you can see it doesn't take much and that changes the whole appearance of the building straight away.
We know roughly by looking at it that it was probably a church or a building like a church.
But until we put the roof colors on it you're like yes yes it definitely is.
Now of course this is a very simple very very low polygon model and I would certainly want to add some
tiny details in here if I wanted to flesh this out but if I wanted a a rough object that I could just
add into my scene this is four metres wide by two metres tall.
If we look from the front or not quite two metres tall would be all the way up here.
So it is quite a small church.
So I might scale it by maybe two and just apply that scale and now have a look at it from unease.
Definitely see the side.
So it is that way.
So here we go.
Now we got two metres tall being about midway up here which is which is roughly right.
So there we go.
That's now a small church of the right size.
So if you were to go and import that into a game engine or use it in other places in your scene it's going
to be more representative and more in scale with most other objects.
If we can go in and add ourselves a new mesh cube for instance I'm going to move it out this cube is
two metres tall something would go G Y and move along this axis here and I'll go G Z one to lift it up
and then I'm just gonna make it a little narrower as well so I'm going to focus in on our cube here
and not adjust the heights I'm going to scale it and go shift Z to say not the height not the z axis
and then go point five by half. There you go.
Soit's one metre by one metres roughly the space a person would take up and we can see here that
they would pass through about here.
So yes it is a small building but it's representative and is a more accurate size now than it was before.
But how did you guys get on.
You know what.
Before I finish off here I'm going to colour in this a slightly pinky colour to represent a person there we go.
Hey Hey!
Excellent.
How did you guys get on looking forward to seeing what you've gone ahead and coloured in and we're getting
ready now for our mid section challenge where you're going to be able to put all of this stuff together
please share what you've done over and the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.